[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Hey.
I'm Ashleigh Sergeant.
And welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go-to show
for tips on how to be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
The World Health
Organization recently
projected that mental
illness will be the leading
cause of death by 2020.
And the Center for
Disease Control
has determined that sleep
disorder is now a public health
epidemic.
What is the role that
technology and social media
play in contributing to mental
health and sleep disorders?
How can we avoid
these illnesses?
And what can we do to nourish
ourselves and create balance?
My guest today is Rod
Stryker, a world-renowned yoga
and meditation teacher
for more than 40 years.
He's the founder of
ParaYoga, the author
of "The Four Desires," and the
creator of the app Sanctuary,
a vital resource
for the practices
of meditation and yoga nidra.
Rod, thanks so much for
being here with me today.
>> Oh, it's great to
be with you, Ashleigh.
>> So these statistics are kind
of staggering, aren't they?
>> They are.
They're alarming.
And the good news
is that there's
a lot we can do about it.
But we have to be rather
deliberate because the fact is
our society, our
culture, and technology
is moving us in a
direction that makes
these things almost inevitable.
So it's about really
making conscious choices
and also accessing some
really vital resources
that I hope we'll talk
about a little bit today.
>> Yeah.
And it's one of these
things that sometimes,
when life is moving so quickly--
and what's happening with
this technological age
is that we start to just accept
things sometimes as they are.
Oh, well, I'm so busy.
Or everybody has anxiety.
Or nobody can really
sleep so well.
>> It's true.
In a way, the new normal
is leaning into emotions
like sadness and anxiety.
And if we're not absolutely
insane and completely disabled
more or less, then we feel
like we're just normal.
>> Or we're not
getting anything done.
>> Yeah.
That's true as well.
>> People are so used to
feeling like they need to be
so, so, so hyper-productive.
I think it's something that
we're experiencing as well.
>> And you know, it's worth just
mentioning that there is value
in having a certain
level of stress.
And I know that sounds
counterintuitive.
But that's stimulation.
And that is motivation.
And it gets us inspired.
But the reality is--
and you mentioned
the technological thrust
of our society now.
The reality is that
none of that technology
takes into account what
our physiology needs.
And the short view on this is
that really, our physiology
and what we need to be
healthy hasn't changed.
But the cumulative
build-up of technology
and less sleep and
constantly going
is actually disrupting
vital physiological systems
in our body.
To make it easy to understand,
the autonomic nervous system
is a part of ourselves, a
part of a nervous system
that we don't think about
and that works all the time.
And it's constantly
measuring our stress levels.
And on the basis of
that, it's either
throwing us into a
fight-or-flight response--
that's over on the
autonomic nervous system
side, the sympathetic side.
Or it's moving us into
a rest-and-digest mode,
where we're regenerating.
And blood flow is moving
toward the organs.
And that's where we begin
to replenish and recharge
ourselves.
But so much of the technology--
what they're actually finding--
so when we're on our
phone, whether we're
doing social media or
we're playing a video game,
it actually stimulates the
sympathetic nervous system,
throws us into this
stress response.
The blue light from computers
and from our smartphones
disrupts the release
of melatonin.
And so our sleep
patterns are disrupted.
Our sleep patterns
get disrupted.
We now aren't actually
processing our life
in the same way we would.
What the human body really
needs is homeostasis.
That's where we repair.
Normally, when we sleep is
where we get our homeostasis.
What that means is that
all the systems of the body
have basically gone
into a standstill.
And in deep sleep,
that's what we access.
Now, in that standstill
state, that's
when the mechanism of
regeneration begins.
If we were to sleep eight
hours, 20% of that time
is in deep sleep.
That's where we regenerate.
But then you start to
add in stress levels
that you mentioned.
And we start to throw in the
mix the effect of technology
on our nervous system.
Sleep patterns get disturbed.
We don't get that 20% of
deep rest that we need.
And then we become
more stressed.
And usually what happens--
it's a kind of catch-22
because the more
stressed we get,
invariably we seek out things
that create more stress, not
more relaxation.
>> Like caffeine, more social
media, more emails or things,
feeling like you're
getting something done.
And by getting something done,
you might relieve that stress.
But in fact, we're
stimulating it.
>> There's also a new
understanding about
the research on this.
And that is that we're
all so overstimulated
that our body is now
starting to develop
a desensitization to those
chemicals related to stress,
mainly cortisol.
So that means that in
order to get motivated,
we need higher levels of
stress than we did 10, 20, 30,
40, 50 years ago.
>> Wow, that's interesting.
>> You now need higher levels
of stress to even feel normally
stimulated to get things done.
So it really is this
vicious cycle and then
this forecast of that in
just not even a decade,
we're going to turn this corner
into so many serious health
issues.
>> Well, it's interesting that
you say that about the possible
need for more cortisol or more
stress to even feel motivated.
And when you said
that, I was connecting
to what people, I think,
identify with as having energy.
Because people think
a lot of times--
when they think about
learning meditation or doing
guided relaxation or
something along those lines,
people think, oh, that will
just make me fall asleep.
Or I'll just be
tired after doing it.
If I relax too much,
I'll just fall asleep.
And there's this, I
think, misunderstanding
happening that actually, our
most beneficial and most vital
resource being
connected to our energy
is actually a relaxed state
where we are energetic as well.
We don't have to feel this
really intense stimulation
to actually get things done.
>> And for what it's worth,
there's another important
element in the
point you're making.
And that is that the
brain has two functions.
So they've been described as
exploitation and exploration.
And the idea is that when
we go into a stress level,
when the brain is stressed,
when the brain is experiencing
we're in stress,
we actually begin
to diminish our free will.
And here's what I mean by that.
The brain starts to go
back when it's in stress.
It goes back to what
it already knows.
Now, its normal
function and what
it functions when it's actually
in a state of relaxation
is what's called
"exploration," which
means you begin to
see new solutions,
new positive directions that
you would normally not see.
In other words, if you've
been having a challenge
that's been sustained
or in place for a while,
if you're stressed, it's very
hard to work out of that box
or out of that prison
or containment.
When you relax, you begin
to see new possibilities.
A client of mine used
to say, you know,
when I work with you--
he was an unlikely
candidate for meditation.
Let me just put it that way.
But when he first began to
learn to do meditation--
and he was a very
high-powered executive
and banking consultant.
And he said, you know,
through meditation, I
begin to hear answers to
questions I haven't yet asked.
And that's the idea here.
It's not just about
our physiology.
But it is about
our mental health.
Because in order to solve
many of the challenges
that we face emotionally and
psychologically, we need rest.
We need to slow down in
order to find those solutions
and then ultimately create from
that new place of discovery
and invention.
That's the natural
condition of a human being.
And I would just say
that, as you mentioned,
I've taught yoga and
meditation for about 40 years.
There's this idea that
yoga and meditation
is a kind of artifice
or a contortion.
Or it's taking you out
of your normative life.
And what we see is that
really, yoga and meditation--
yoga nidra, for example--
bring us back to normative life.
It's life that takes us out
of our normative state, which
is creativity and
healing and regeneration
and rest and enthusiasm
and joy and peace
and also, by the way, the
ability to work our way out
of sadness, the ability
to work away out of stress
and challenges that we face.
So there are resources.
But the point is that we need
to really make an effort,
if you will, to step out
of the normative flow,
let our neighbors and our
people at work and stuff--
if they're going to continue to
operate at that level of stress
and momentum, let them do it.
If you have the education,
which is why we're here today--
to help educate people
that there are resources
that they can use
that really help
meet the demands of the
world we're in today.
And I think that yoga nidra is
one of the most powerful ones
that people can
use and work with.
It's probably the easiest one
for people to access and get
the most benefit from.
Yoga nidra has been written
about for almost 3,000 years.
And it's actually
really catching on.
In terms of the
yoga world, I think
this is now the next frontier
about the resource people
are looking to work with.
It's as simple as
lying on your back
and listening to very simple
guidance and direction.
And the point about yoga nidra--
"nidra" means sleep, and
"yoga" means awareness.
I call it "enlightened sleep."
So it means that
while you're sleeping,
you're actually still aware.
And it's referring
to a kind of sleep
that I spoke about
earlier, which
is that state of homeostasis.
It's dreamless sleep.
And that's where you repair
mentally and emotionally.
That's where your cognition
is heightened and developed,
your brain function,
your memory.
Your creativity is heightened.
But it's also the critical
thing to repair physiologically.
>> Can you tell us a little
bit about how it brings us
into the delta state?
Because I know that one of
the big taglines that we hear
around yoga nidra is like,
20 minutes of yoga nidra
is equal to--
I feel like that
stat varies a lot.
>> That's true.
The ultimate state of yoga nidra
is indeed the delta rhythm.
It's predominantly delta.
If a sleep scientist
would look at it,
they would effectively
see that you were asleep.
But they would see this
other little element in it.
They would see a little
elevated alpha rhythm, too.
Delta is deep sleep.
Delta is where we regenerate.
But the peak or this
elevation of the alpha state
that we normally
don't see in sleep
means that there's a subtle
trace of awareness happening
while you're sleeping.
And that's been
documented in research.
But in essence, we don't reach
that deep state homeostasis
and physiological repair
when we are dreaming.
It's when we're in
dreamless sleep.
And that's the
predominant delta state.
That's what I mentioned earlier
is only about 20% to 25%
of eight hours of sleep.
So that's number one.
How does it get you there?
It kind of really
works systematically,
which is to help you relax
through various layers.
The first thing we have
to do is calm your senses
and bring your attention
inward and then gradually,
through different
steps in the process,
attention to the
breath, attention
to where you're holding
tension, continuing
to internalize awareness.
You gradually sense
yourself starting
to disconnect from the
world as we know it
and connecting to consciousness,
this ever-sustaining,
ever-present intelligence
that really is
running the show of life and
is what pervades life itself.
And that's what we're
connecting to with no cognition
to distract us from it.
>> That's amazing.
And I've experienced
it many times.
And one thing I
remember hearing you
say that I thought
was really important
was how important is this
in relation to meditation.
Because there's a lot of people
now really starting to realize,
OK, wow.
I think I need to
meditate, becoming
aware of their anxiety,
becoming aware of the stresses,
becoming aware of
some of the diseases
that are more prominent.
And more and more
people, I believe,
are waking up to the
idea that we have power
to work with these things.
And how do you
think this relates
to beginning a
meditation practice?
Because in my
experience, yoga nidra
can be a little
bit more appealing
and more accessible
to some people
because we get to
do it laying down.
>> I would agree.
I mean, we're on the
same page with that.
And I think because
of really what we've
been talking about thus far--
because our stress levels
are as high as they are--
it's a lot to ask a
really stressed out mind
to reach a quality
in meditation that
speaks to this same
state of absolute ease
and connecting to
the highest, most
pristine part of ourselves.
It's hard to do that
through sitting up.
There's physical discomfort
and things like that.
So you make a really good case.
I've taught the same thing.
Yoga nidra allows us
to immediately impact
our central nervous system much
more quickly than meditation.
Meditation eventually
gets there.
And the chief distinction
between the two
is what allows us to go deeper
in meditation is effectively
concentration, which we've all
become less and less efficient
about.
Again, modern life-- the
impact on concentration
is significant, just like
its impact on memory.
>> Technology can pull
our awareness into so many
different places in
the blink of an eye.
>> We're overstimulated.
So that's the vehicle
for meditation.
However, the vehicle for
yoga nidra is relaxation.
And because you're
lying on your back
and because the yogis left us
some really amazing systematic
processes to help us relax, if
we think about, would I rather
concentrate to reach this
heightened place of healing
and regeneration, or
would I rather relax
to reach that similar
place, most people probably
will get deeper faster
and get to that place
through yoga nidra.
Yeah.
So I don't think
that's insignificant.
I think the one thing I do
want to say about it, though,
is not all experiences within
yoga nidra are created equal.
There are actually different
levels of that experience.
And mind you, all of
them are productive.
All of them are meaningful.
We all need to slow down.
And by the way, you had
mentioned falling asleep.
It's OK if you fall asleep.
You may actually wake
up occasionally tired.
But the truth is that a lot
of us, if not every single one
of us these days, is tired.
But we're so
overstimulated, we're
kind of overriding
an awareness of where
our bodies and our
minds really are.
Yoga nidra gets you
closer, gets you back
to knowing where you are.
And if you need rest,
you might fall asleep.
So stage one is just
this relaxation.
You may feel a softening in your
body, this kind of turning away
from the world.
And the world itself, even
the sounds outside of the room
or where you're practicing,
are more distant.
That's already a
great first step.
Second step is now where you
begin to really experience
a distance from
your own thoughts,
where worry and concern
vanish completely,
which is-- again, how
wonderful would that be,
especially citing
those statistics you
mentioned at the beginning?
It really becomes meaningful.
Now, some teachers would
say that those first two
steps are not yoga nidra.
They are preparations to
enter the state of yoga nidra.
General relaxation,
withdrawal from the world,
and then ultimately this
deep softening and separation
from the mind and all
its concerns-- those
are preparations.
Third stage is awareness
of the state of sleep.
Literally, you can be lying
there and not sleeping
but aware of the state of sleep.
It's really special.
And then the final stage
is where we would describe
there are no experiences.
You're beyond all feelings
and all experiences now.
Yogis and spiritual
types might consider
that contemplative ideas
around, that's pure oneness.
There's nothing to seek.
There's no seeker,
nothing being sought.
It's just pure being.
And that's the
height of yoga nidra.
And that's the ultimate stage.
All of them are productive.
>> Awesome.
Will you give us an
experience of it?
>> Oh, I'd love to.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
OK.
So what I'm going to suggest is
that you get some basic props
so that you're comfortable
for the practice.
I'm going to ask you
to lie on your back.
It's terrific if you have
something under your head.
And make sure the surface
that you're resting on
is comfortable and soft enough
to accommodate you resting
for about 10 minutes or so.
So please get
comfortable as I lead you
through this short
yoga nidra practice.
It's best if you do have
something under your head
so that you have some padding.
And if you like, you're more
than welcome to have something
under your thighs so you have
a little additional lower back
support.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Arms are by your side.
And have the heels about
just a little wider than hip
distance apart.
I'll also recommend that
you have situated yourself
in a room that's
relatively quiet.
And if it is bright,
it's a really good idea
to have just a lightweight
covering over your eyes,
but nothing too heavy, not
really a heavy eye pillow.
OK.
So as you settle down, I'd
like you to go ahead and close
your eyes.
And make any final
adjustments you might need.
The intention is
that you won't have
to move during the practice.
So this is the time to
get really comfortable.
Let me give you a moment
or two just to settle in.
And see if you need
any more adjustments
so that you can remain still
throughout the duration
of this practice.
Keep in mind that yoga nidra
can be done any time of day.
And this practice, as
well as other practices,
can be done as many
times as you need.
So in other words, do the same
practice over and over again.
Find new practices.
Practices can vary in length
from 10 minutes to as long
as even an hour.
OK.
With your eyes closed
and your body open,
just first have the intention
that you will stay aware
throughout the practice.
In other words, we're
going to invite the body
to go into deep sleep,
the mind to sleep,
but that awareness
will be sustained
throughout the practice.
And then make the decision that
for the next 10 minutes or so,
you will not try and
solve any outside issues.
You'll let go of all
responsibility and all care.
There's nothing and no
one to take care of now.
Just rest.
With your eyes
closed, initially just
become aware of
the body breathing.
And then I'm going to ask you
to go ahead and take eight
slow, comfortable breaths.
So you're going to begin
to expand your capacity.
But you're going to do in
a way that the breath is
as smooth and as comfortable as
possible, just eight of them--
again, just relatively
still, the abdomen
softly expanding
and contracting.
Just be aware of
the body breathing.
And notice how you're
using your mind
to shape your breath
slow and smooth.
And your breath is shaping
your mind to become quiet
and relaxed.
Three more times, please.
Just relax.
Follow the breath once
more as slow as possible.
Excellent.
Now please allow your
breath to flow effortlessly.
You're no longer shaping
your breath consciously.
With the breath
flowing effortlessly,
just become aware of
its unique qualities--
how inhale is slightly
different than exhale.
As you exhale, that's an
opportunity to let go.
And as you inhale, that's the
experience of a kind of wave
that regenerates and charges
every cell of the body.
As you exhale,
it's a letting go.
As you inhale, a
wave of healing.
Your breath is effortless.
No trying, effortless effort.
And continuing to empty all
thought, memory, movement each
time you exhale, become aware
of the sensations in the body.
Notice how some sensations
are very familiar.
And others are unique
for this moment.
Just allow the breath
to flow effortlessly.
Notice where you're holding.
Notice the sensation of
contraction, tension.
And have the
intention to let go.
As you exhale, relax.
Sense your body
supported by the floor.
In this moment, be
aware that there
is no holding, no contraction.
Allow innate
intelligence-- not mind--
to shape your breath.
Complete relaxation on inhale.
Complete relaxation on exhale.
Have the sense you're
no longer the breather.
You are awareness,
experiencing your body breathe.
Now sense the space around you.
You can begin by seeing
or feeling or sensing
where the body ends and where
the space just outside of it
begins.
Sense that space is inherently
nurturing and healing
as though you're surrounded
by healing and nurturing
intelligence.
Then, when the body
breathes in, sense
that healing and nurturance
moving through your skin
toward your spine.
And when you breathe out,
it moves out of your spine
to the space around your body.
Effortless effort.
See it, or feel it, or sense it.
When you breathe in, this wave
of healing nurturance comes in.
When you breathe out, it
expands, fortifies the body,
and fills the space around you.
Please continue.
Just relax.
And slowly, you'll
experience that you
enter into this practice without
trying, no visualization.
Healing nurturance in, and
flooding the body and the space
around you on your exhale.
Please continue.
Now eventually, just relax.
And feel a pool of
healing and nurturance,
or see it, or sense it,
both inside the body
and outside the body
approximately arm's
length in every direction.
You rest in a pool of
healing and nurturance.
Body sleeps.
Mind lets go.
Rest.
You can continue to lie in
this state as long as you like,
provided you don't fall asleep.
But if you're ready to
come out of the practice,
you would do so now,
first by breathing down
toward your hands and feet.
So your breath will deepen.
And then once you feel or sense
the breath bringing vitality
back to your extremities,
you can begin to move them.
Move your toes, your fingertips.
Just bring the thumbs
over your fingertips.
And then eventually roll over
to your right side to come back.
The practice is now complete.
So take your time to ease back.
Feel good?
>> Mm.
So good.
>> It's hard to talk.
>> Yeah.
Thank you so much.
It's such an important
practice, I think.
>> Important, yeah.
Thank you again.
>> Thank you for being here.
And thank you so
much for joining us.
We'll see you next time.
[THEME MUSIC]